[Proposal Revision] Codable synthesis for enums with associated values (#1269)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/0295-codable-synthesis-for-enums-with-associated-values.md

which points to another container that contains the values as they would be encoded
for structs and classes.

> Associated values can also be unlabeled, in which case an identifier will be generated in the form of `_$N`, where `$N` is the 0-based position of the parameter.

Reviewer: I think that it may be nice to add a note on how this solves a problem with changes to the shape of the `enum`.  Is there ay plan on handling something like this:

```swift
enum E {
case c(_1: String, Int)
}
```
This I believe would cause conflicts with `_1` no?  Is this treated as an overloaded case and simply not synthesized?

Author: Good point. This should be fine as long as there are no collisions, but if there are, we should emit a diagnostic. Right now it will just generate invalid code and then choke on that. So at least it rejects it, but without a useful error message. I'll add that.

```swift
enum Command: Codable {
  case load(String)
  case store(key: String, Int)
}
```

would encoded to

```json
{
  "load": {
    "_0": "MyKey"
  }
}
```

and 

```json
{
  "store": {
    "key": "MyKey",
    "_1": 42
  }
}
```

> An enum case without associated values would be encoded as an empty `KeyedContainer`,

Reviewer: A note indicating that this allows an easier time with shape changes would be nice.

which points to another container that contains the values as they would be encoded
for structs and classes.

> Associated values can also be unlabeled, in which case an identifier will be generated in the form of `_$N`, where `$N` is the 0-based position of the parameter. Using generated identifiers allows more flexbility in evolution of models than using an `UnkeyedContainer` would. If a user defined parameter has an identifier that conflicts with a generated identifier, the compiler will produce a diagnostic message.

Reviewer 2: `flexbility` → `flexibility`

```suggestion
Associated values can also be unlabeled, in which case an identifier will be generated in the form of `_$N`, where `$N` is the 0-based position of the parameter. Using generated identifiers allows more flexibility in evolution of models than using an `UnkeyedContainer` would. If a user defined parameter has an identifier that conflicts with a generated identifier, the compiler will produce a diagnostic message.
```

```json
{
  "dumpToDisk": true
  "dumpToDisk": {}
}
```

> With the exception of the last case, this solution is closely following the default behavior of the Rust library [serde](https://serde.rs/container-attrs.html).

Reviewer: I think that it still would be reasonable to acknowledge serde (as a foot note) .

```json
{
  "dumpToDisk": {}
}
```

> This allows these cases to evovle in the same manner as cases with associated values, without breaking compatibility.

Reviewer 2: `evovle` → `evolve`

```suggestion
This allows these cases to evolve in the same manner as cases with associated values, without breaking compatibility.
```

}
```

> The `encode(to:)` implementation would looks as follows:

Reviewer 2: `looks` → `look`

```suggestion
The `encode(to:)` implementation would look as follows:
```

```swift
public func encode(to encoder: Encoder) throws {
  var container = encoder.container(keyedBy: CodingKeys.self)
  switch self {
  case let .load(key):
    var nestedContainer = container.nestedContainer(keyedBy: LoadCodingKeys.self, forKey: .load)
    try nestedContainer.encode(key, forKey: .key)
  case let .store(key, value):
    var nestedContainer = container.nestedContainer(keyedBy: StoreCodingKeys.self, forKey: .store)
    try nestedContainer.encode(key, forKey: .key)
    try nestedContainer.encode(value, forKey: .value)
  }
}
```

> and `init(from decoder: Decoder)`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the `init(from:)` implementation would look as follows:
```

```swift
public init(from decoder: Decoder) throws {
  let container = try decoder.container(keyedBy: CodingKeys.self)
  if container.allKeys.count != 1 {
    let context = DecodingError.Context(
      codingPath: container.codingPath,
      debugDescription: "Invalid number of keys found, expected one.")
    throw DecodingError.typeMismatch(Command.self, context)

>   }

Reviewer 2: Synthesized code for structs seems to ignore any extra keys. Can you do the same for enum cases?

```json
{
  "extra_key": "extra_value",
  "load": {
    "key": "MyKey"
  }
}
```

```swift
public init(from decoder: Decoder) throws {
  let container = try decoder.container(keyedBy: CodingKeys.self)
  let allKeys = container.allKeys
  if allKeys.contains(.load) {
    /* ... */
  } else if allKeys.contains(.store) {
    /* ... */
  } else {
    let context = /* ... */
    throw DecodingError.typeMismatch(Command.self, context)
  }
}
```

Author: I don't think that would be a good idea. If the container contains more than one key, it is malformed. Checking for every possible key in there would be very bad for performance.

```swift
enum Command: Codable {
  case load(key: String)
  case store(key: String, Int)

  enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey {
    case load = "lade"
  }

  enum LoadCodingKeys: String, CodingKey {
    case key = "schluessel"
    case _1  = "wert"

>   }

Reviewer 3: 🎉

```swift
enum Command: Codable {
  case load(key: String)
  case store(key: String, Int)

  enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey {
    case load = "lade"
  }

>   enum LoadCodingKeys: String, CodingKey {

Author: ```suggestion
  enum StoreCodingKeys: String, CodingKey {
```

    case key = "schluessel"
    case _1  = "wert"

>   }

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't the `case _1  = "wert"` cause a compiler diagnostic?
(The `.load` case only has a single associated value.)

Author: Ah, that should be `StoreCodingKeys` instead. Adding keys that don't match any parameters would cause a diagnostic, yes.

}
```

### Evolution and compatibility

> Enum cases can evolve in the same way as structs and classes. Adding new fields, or removing existing ones is compatible, as long as the values are optional and the identifiers for the other cases don't change. This is in opposition to the evolution model of the language, where adding or removing associated values is a source and binary breaking change. We believe that a lot of use cases benefit from the ability to evolve the model, where source and binary compatibility are not an issue, e.g. in applications, services, or for internal types. If binary compatibility is important, evolution can be supported by having a single container with all the parameters as the associated value.

Reviewer 2: `single container` → `single struct or class`

```suggestion
Enum cases can evolve in the same way as structs and classes. Adding new fields, or removing existing ones is compatible, as long as the values are optional and the identifiers for the other cases don't change. This is in opposition to the evolution model of the language, where adding or removing associated values is a source and binary breaking change. We believe that a lot of use cases benefit from the ability to evolve the model, where source and binary compatibility are not an issue, e.g. in applications, services, or for internal types. If binary compatibility is important, evolution can be supported by having a single struct or class with all the parameters as the associated value.
```

> Enum cases can evolve in the same way as structs and classes. Adding new fields, or removing existing ones is compatible, as long as the values are optional and the identifiers for the other cases don't change. This is in opposition to the evolution model of the language, where adding or removing associated values is a source and binary breaking change. We believe that a lot of use cases benefit from the ability to evolve the model, where source and binary compatibility are not an issue, e.g. in applications, services, or for internal types. If binary compatibility is important, evolvability can still be achieved by having a single associated value of a type that acts as container for the values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enum cases can evolve in the same way as structs and classes. Adding new fields, or removing existing ones is compatible, as long as the values are optional and the identifiers for the other cases don't change. This is in opposition to the evolution model of the language, where adding or removing associated values is a source and binary breaking change. We believe that a lot of use cases benefit from the ability to evolve the model, where source and binary compatibility are not an issue, e.g. in applications, services, or for internal types. If binary compatibility is important, evolution can be supported by having a single container with all the parameters as the associated value.
```

I'm not too fond of using "evolution" since it has a specific use within the documentation at the moment for the ABI evolution and that tends to be difficult to tease apart.  Unfortunately, I do not have a good solution at the moment :-(.

This proposal specifically does not support auto-synthesis for enums with overloaded case identifiers. This decision has been made because there is no clear way to support the feature, while also allowing the model to evolve, without severe restrictions. The separate cases in an enum typically have different semantics associated with them, so it is crucial to be able to properly identify the different cases and reject unknown cases.

#### Evolution with overloaded case identifiers

In this proposal, we are using keys as descriminators. For overloaded case names that would not be sufficient to identify the different overloads. An alternative would be to use the full name, including labels, e.g. `"store(key:,value:)"` for `case store(key: String, value: Int)`. This leads to several problems.

1. Not a valid enum case identifier, so no user customization possible
2. Not forward/backward compatible because it changes when parameters are added

> 3. Very Swift specific, making interop with non-Swift systems awkward

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand the third point - the key is a string value.

Author: I can remove it. My point was `"store(key:,value:)"` is not something commonly used in other languages and would be a bit weird if it appeared in a serialized document.
